Your company is named for seeing stones
used to view things at a very long
distance in J.R.R. Tolken's Lord of the
Rings. Also worth noting that in the
course of Tolken's story, [music] they
fall into the wrong hands and are used
for evil as well. The naming choice was
intentional. It's a built-in warning and
reminder to us.
What does [music] the most mysterious
and paranoiainducing company in all of
Silicon [music] Valley actually do? How
did the tech industry learn to love the
military-industrial complex?
Is artificial intelligence about to
revolutionize warfare, [music] help the
United States win an arms race with
China, or place us all under [music]
digital surveillance?
My guest today was recently commissioned
as a lieutenant colonel in the US Army
reserves. And in his day job, he's the
chief technology officer of Palunteer, a
company whose relationship to the
[music] US government is increasingly
profitable and immensely controversial.
Sham Sankar, welcome to Interesting
Times. [music] Great to be here. Thanks
for having me, Ross.
>> So, we're going to talk about a lot of
things. We're going to talk about your
biography and background, [music] how
you came to be an officer in the US
military, the future of technology and
warfare, but we have to start with a
very, very simple question.
>> What is it that Palunteer does?
>> Great question.
>> Thank you.
>> I spent a long time crafting it. Most
important question. Yeah.
>> Uh, let's start just at a foundational
level. We're a software company and we
build software that allows you to manage
your data to make better decisions and I
think that's best understood through an
example. So I spend a lot of my time uh
helping companies manufacture things.
Really the re-industrialization of
America. So if you're a manufacturer,
you have a system called a PLM system,
product life cycle management system
that you use to design your product. You
have another system, a manufacturing exe
execution system that you use to manage
the manufacturing, the actual production
of it on the assembly line. You have
another system called an ERP system for
inventory management, supply chain
management, and yet another system uh
for managing sales orders, a customer
relationship management system. What we
do is we build software that allows you
to bring the data from those systems
together so that you can manage the the
process holistically. Now, you know,
half of what Palantry does is
commercial. We work in 50 different
industries from energy and mining to
pharmaceuticals and insurance. In the
commercial world, you're optimizing the
value chain. You have a series of
decisions that you're making from the
hand of your supplier to the hand of
your customer. And of course, you can
generalize it to the military, which
we're very well known for what we do
there. Uh you can think about that as
you're optimizing the kill chain from
sensor to shooter, they call it
doctrally. Uh but it's the same thing,
which is how do I find the enemy
targets? How do I decide which targets I
want to prosecute based on maybe the
inventory I have on hand, the effect it
might have to the enemy? How do I manage
my personnel readiness? How do I manage
my equipment readiness? All of these
things need to work or it doesn't work.
>> Right? So your CEO Alex Karp did an
interview with my colleague Morin Dow a
little while ago and he had this
extremely resonant phrase. He said
Palunteer is in the business of the
finding of hidden things. But a lot of
the narrative about Palunteer sort of
assumes that that means you go to work
for a government or a corporation and
then you go out and find those things in
the external world, right? But in your
description, it is you're finding things
that institutions already have access to
but don't don't know or don't
understand. Yeah. The cynical way to
think about Palunteer is it took
something as sexy as James Bond to
motivate engineers to work on a problem
as boring as data integration. But
that's actually the core of what
generates the value that if you look at
any of these institutions, they have so
many silos of data. They all have a
specific purpose. Um, but the greater
truth is lost in the seams between these
systems. And historically, we've just
relied on humans connecting the dots in
their heads. And so we build Iron Man
suits for those humans to be able to ask
questions of the data, usually with a
normative view of getting to a decision.
So it's not insights for insight's sake,
but it's actually what am I trying to
do? How do I optimize the operation of
the business?
>> And so obviously from the public's point
of view, the reason Palanteer is
sort of, you know, a big figure in
national politics and national debates
is that half of your work is done for
the military, the government, and so on.
Right.
>> Yeah.
>> And that's not just a business choice,
right? there is a kind of values-based
theory that Palunteer has of why why you
do that kind of work. Can you talk about
that?
>> Yeah, and I would even just state it
even more strongly. We started in the
government. We started really as a a
small group of folks who wanted to work
on problems in national security. And if
you rewind and go back to this immediate
period post 911, the kind of political
discourse was very much something like
what's more important, privacy or
security? I don't know. As a bunch of
engineers, we thought that was a silly
question. They both seem really
important. Why wouldn't we be trying to
have more of both? You have to actually
build technologies that are cognizant of
both ends of these things and are
pushing out the frontier. And we're
going to come back to the privacy
question a bit more, but in the case of
government, you have silos of
information that the government has
access to, but some parts of the
government are not supposed to sort of
look at, right, or use or deploy for
reasons having to do with constitutional
rights and privacy. But in the end, you
are not responsible for the choices that
companies or the department of defense
make about when to access something and
when not to. You create a structure that
gives them opportunities to say we you
can't access this or you know this
department can't access that. But
they're in the end run they're running.
They're responsible.
>> They're responsible. Right. Okay. And I
I didn't really address your question of
like the the kind of moral view we have
which is why we started the company that
the west is a force for good. We believe
in in strengthening the legitimacy of
these institutions. We should have been
able to connect the dots and prevent
9/11.
>> Right.
>> So what what is the role of us as
technologists in this country? Um what
is our obligation to America? How can we
be helping? And we believe in leaning in
and solving these problems that our war
fighters should have the best software.
>> Right. And here it's worth noting that
your company is named for seeing stones
used to view things at a very long
distance um in Jer Tolken's Lord of the
Rings and the palunteer these seeing
stones were used by the noble kingdoms
of the west uh in that story. Uh also
worth noting that in the course of
Tolken's story they fall into the wrong
hands and are used for evil as well. Um
the naming choice was intentional. It's
a built-in warning and reminder to us
>> that you're basically building something
that
>> is something powerful and you have an
obligation on how it's used and you you
have to be thoughtful of this stuff that
you know my broad critique society would
be you know there's what to build and
how to build it. The valley is obsessed
with how to build things like
engineering is a craft and very little
thought is given to what should we build
like what what are the valuable things
for society? what is the greater second
order consequence of what we're doing
here? Uh you you know so I'd like to get
both of these things right. You have to
be right about how you're going to build
these things. Worldclass software and
you have to build the right thing that
matters for the nation. But any right
thing as you said in the warning is
going to be powerful enough to be
misused potentially.
>> Yeah. Right. By the sorrows if not the
Saurons of the 21st century. So now I
want to see if you can walk me through
two examples, one foreign and one
domestic of the zones where Palanteer
software is being used by the
government. And I'll see how concrete I
can get you to make it because I know
that we're talking about areas um where
there's confidentiality and national
security and so on. But so let's start.
You talked before about the kill chain.
What is the kill chain?
>> The kill chain is uh the sequence of
decisions. This is so this is a
doctrinal military term uh of how you go
from sensor to shooter. It's the
targeting process. So how do I identify
where the enemy is? Um how do I confirm
positive ID? Go through the rules of
engagement, get the JAG sign off that
this is a legal target. Uh how do I then
send that to the gun line to prosecute
the target? Having prosecuted the
target, how do I then do a battle damage
assessment and understand did I hit the
target? and then kind of cycle back
around to what do I do next?
>> So let's again to make it even more
concrete. So, US special forces, let's
say, are operating in Central Asia or
the Horn of Africa or something, right?
And they are faced with a particular
mission and what happens that Palunteer
is involved in they have they have a
mission. They're trying to take out some
sort of, you know, a member of a
terrorist group, let's say.
>> Or we could use an example like the
Houthis, you know. So um you could say
that there's some starting point of
intelligence that it could be from
override imagery could be from any
number of sensors that are out there
that there's something at this location.
Okay. Now then how do I
>> primarily primarily satellite
information or just a whole range
>> terrestrial sensor satellite
information. So spacebased terrestrial
those are the two opportunities really.
>> Um you know you're never going to just
prosecute off of one single source of
intelligence. So, okay, can I
corroborate this with other sources of
intelligence? How do I get a positive ID
that this is not a decoy and maybe I'm
not misattributing what it is that I'm
looking at here? Then there's a
prioritization process. Is this worth
shooting? Is this a threat? Um, what is
the effect of taking this capability off
the battle space? Does it provide
safety? Does it provide more room to
maneuver? Or is it actually kind of
irrelevant?
Let's assume we decide it's it's
important to take out of the battle
space. Uh maybe they're going to fire a
missile at a a destroyer.
Then it's um okay, well which gun
>> from a destroyer.
>> No, they were sorry. Yeah, the who's
here are going to fire a missile at our
destroyer. Right. So we're trying to
preempt.
>> Yeah.
>> Okay.
>> So then, you know, we go through the
process. There's legal sign off. Then
you get to the point of like, okay,
well, how do I want to interdict this?
Am I going to use a $2 million missile?
Am I what what are my options for doing
this? How long will it take? What are
the consequences of logistics? what's
the time in flight to get there? Um, can
I actually action this? Then there's
sending that to the gun line or the
weapon system that will do it. And then
there's scheduling the collection. Maybe
you're going to use overhead imagery.
You're going to fly a drone with a
camera to see like having shot it, did
we eliminate it or not? So that cycle is
really that's the kill chain. Uh, and
the whole point of this is applying
technology to be faster than your
adversary at going through that. If
you're faster than your adversary at
going through that, assuming you're
fighting, you're going to win. Assuming
you're not fighting, you're going to
have maximal deterrence.
>> So the Wii here, right, is the US
military.
>> Yes.
>> It's not Palunteer, right? You are not
personally running the kill chain,
>> but so who is actually managing the
process? Is it it's just
>> the combatant commanders, the the green
suitors and blue suitors as we call it,
the military itself,
>> right? So the soldier on the ground is
therefore is sort of downstream of the
information that Palunteer software is
collating and spitting out for the
people giving commands to him or her.
>> That's right. The software extends to
enable collaboration. So I think part of
the value is you know you want a single
pane of data. We're all seeing the same
thing but you have multiple panes of
glass. So the soldier on the ground
might be looking at on their mobile
phone and you might have in the
situation room a big command center view
of of the whole battle space. But what
you want to know is that we're all
looking at the same thing even if we're
looking at it through different
applications or or mechanisms relative
to where we sit. So this would apply
basically across any area where the US
is doing military intervention. So what
you're describing presumably applies to,
you know, elements of our attack against
the Iranian nuclear program, right? Or
it would apply to the politically highly
controversial attacks uh in the
Caribbean or the Pacific that the Trump
that the Trump administration has been
conducting.
>> These are the those are the sort of
overseas zones where what you're doing
is integrated into what the US military
is doing.
>> Yeah. Our software is deployed
ubiquitously across the the military. I
mean, I think there's actually even a
bigger question there where the military
is a massive enterprise and I think one
of the most important missing strategic
assets for us is an integrated view from
the factory floor to the foxhole. You
know, a people spend a lot of time
thinking about the the sharpest end of
the kill chain. You know, like how do we
inter for understandable reasons?
>> Yeah. But if you think about the
complexity of the problem, you start
realizing, well, you know, we spend a
large amount of money building weapons.
How do we know we're building the right
weapons? How do we know the consequences
they're going to have in the foxhole 3
years from now? When you deploy DGs out,
a destroyer out, you know, all these
ships need maintenance at some point.
So, if you're extending the deployment,
you're deferring the maintenance. How do
you trade off present readiness against
future readiness? Um, these are the
sorts of questions that I think are much
more strategic that are hard to answer,
but are determinative on delivering
deterrence. So obviously anything the US
does that kills people overseas is
controversial but probably the most
controversial thing that Palunteer
software is being used for right now I
would say is for immigration enforcement
um with ICE and other other
organizations. Can you talk a little bit
about how Palunteer software is
integrated there?
>> Yeah certainly. Um well first I think
it's I a lot of the controversy moves
with the politics. You know, we first
started working with ICE when Haime
Zapata, an ICE agent, was assassinated
in Mexico in 2011. I believe it's either
2010 or 2011 um under the Obama
administration. And we've worked with
ICE from then on until the present
moment. Um the the work is is
structurally very similar. It's like
there's information that DHS has access
to that are spread out across the
component agencies
that um humans are trying to look up.
They're literally doing searches in all
these systems. So, how do we enable them
to actually see the whole picture and
then use that for resource allocation?
So, where do we have threats? Where
should we be allocating people? How do
we prosecute uh removal operations? Um
that's, you know, in many ways exactly
what we're doing.
>> So, a couple things, right? So, number
one, I think Palanteer, you have a $30
million contract um to build a platform
called Immigration OS. So what kind of
data that's available to enforcement and
removal operations?
>> So encounters at the border, right? Um
asylum applications or the lack of one
um applications for benefits. Uh so a
lot of this data really relates to non
non-permanent resident non US citizens
who are interacting with various facets
of DHS uh as they come here. So it's
data on specific encounters,
encounters they have with border patrol,
criminal justice system and so on. But
does it extend to things like last known
address? Is that the kind of data in
>> when it comes So what was the address
they reported in the border account?
What was the address they reported when
they applied for benefits?
>> Right? So then that becomes the kind of
data that if I doing a raid they end up
using right to say okay we have this
person here and so on. So, so it is sort
of effectuating raids through that
mechanism.
>> To what extent does it go beyond that?
Like is there integration with local law
enforcement for instance with any of
this stuff? Okay.
>> But I I mean what is the I think the
real question just zooming out a little
bit. We're working with agencies that
have lawful authorities. So what what
data are they collecting? That's the
data we're helping them integrate. So,
if there's a lawful authority for them
to collect the data, you know, I don't I
don't think local law enforcement is
part of this. I'm I'm not saying I have
an objection to them being part of this.
I'm I'm just saying that No, I'm just
I'm just trying to get into I mean, I
think the the sort of the core fear that
people have about Well, there's sort of
two layers of fears that I think people
have with this kind of domestic data
collection and that are distinct from
people who just oppose deportation.
One layer which as far as I can tell is
sort of overstated or wrong is that
Palunteer is you know again going out
and devising no data
>> right you're not devising but you're not
devising systems to acquire new new
forms of data for the government right
but you are creating systems where the
government has access to data and I I
think this is important on a scale that
no government has ever had access to
before right like one of the unique
features of 21st century America,
digital age America, is that, you know,
it's just so much easier to track and
observe people in all kinds of different
ways. And corporate America does that
even more than the government does,
right? But
>> I think so. I don't think that's the
fundamental inflection, though. I think
it's really that um
>> the number of decisions you're trying to
make are growing much more quickly than
your headcount is growing. So let let's
just say in the ICE case uh you would
have had 20 roughly on the order of 20
systems that you would have to manually
go search across. You know how many
times
>> if you're trying to find the address the
address of someone who you want to
deport
>> right um do you think you're going
through all 20 systems you know maybe
you stop at 10 maybe forgot to search
some systems. So the the entropy is just
that you're not actually able to do the
work. You know you're fighting your
tooling the whole time. And this sort of
leads to the lack of legitimacy of the
institution. It's like you're not able
to do the thing that you're actually
supposed to do. Of course, the
complexity of this is is growing as
you're asked to do more and more. You
know, it's like maybe I was doing 10
things before and I could do it with the
people I had. Now I have to do a
thousand things. That means I clearly
don't get to all thousand things. And
the things I get to, I'm not doing them.
Well, it's like, okay, well, why are we
using the human to search 20 different
systems? That's clearly a problem that
technology can do. How do we use the
human to do things that are uniquely
human judge that require human judgment?
>> Right? I guess I'm just saying that I
think for at least some people and maybe
I'm among them, there's a kind of relief
in the idea that all of this data has
multiplied so quickly that people can't,
you know, that sort of authorities can't
quite keep up with it. Right? So if we
walk outside, if we walk outside of this
room and enter, you know, Midtown
Manhattan, we are under constant
surveillance. Now it's not all it's not
government surveillance right but
there's a kind of relaxation that you
can feel where you're like okay but all
of this surveillance is you know
distributed across so many different
public and private entities and unless I
am literally a terrorist the odds that
people are going to be constantly
watching and scrutinizing me are very
low but then the fear becomes you know
well if we have this incredible way to
make it all more and more and more
efficient then maybe privacy does start
to disappear I don't know what do you
What do you make of that?
>> There's there's two thoughts there. One
is well, you know, are you saying that
you feel safer because the institutions
that are supposed to protect you are
structurally incompetent? And that's the
part where I feel like
>> the answer might be yes sometimes.
Right.
>> Yeah. And then a consequence of that
which you know I think a democracy can
decide a consequence of that is that
they also can't do their job. They can't
protect you from the things that they're
supposed to protect you from. So, I I'd
offer another solution to this, which is
they should be really good at doing what
they're doing, and we should have a
strong ability to oversee that they're
not doing things that they're not
supposed to be doing. That's exactly
what we designed Pounder to do. So, this
wasn't our system, but I think it's an
illustrative example because it was
high-profile at the time. If you go back
in time, um, there were government
employees who looked up the passports of
Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama and
they got caught. How did they get
caught? the system they're using
generates audit logs. People were
reviewing the audit log and you know did
you have a permissible use to look this
up? The answer was clearly no. And they
were they were quickly caught and
terminated,
>> right?
>> You know, and so you have to both help
uh the people who are protecting us and
you have to empower the people who are
watching the watchers so they also have
asymmetrically strong technology to
ensure that there are no abuses.
>> So who is watching the watchers? It's
like so let's we can stick with
immigration enforcement, right? So
presumably there's data and information
that is protected by privacy that that
you know that ICE is not supposed to be
accessing, right?
>> So the the first line of defense is on
the front end like do you even have
authority to have this data? So you know
the lawyers on the front end are you
have data use agreements that they're
that they have with uh with their own
inter agency data use agreements. the
authorities they collected the data to
begin with and then the second line of
defense is after they have the data is
are you using it for permitted use and
that's usually you know I don't know for
every agency this is look I'm a I'm a
builder so you consult a policy person
but something like the office of the
inspector general um other law
enforcement agencies that are
responsible for this sometimes depending
on the context it can actually be
counter intelligence it's the same the
same infrastructure that you would use
to make sure that people aren't abusing
the data is how you would also make sure
that you know you don't have a spy I in
your organization,
>> right? In the end though, it is up to
the people running those institutions to
decide
>> whether you know whether to basically
track abuses at all. Right? So, and it
might be at different levels and
different agencies, but like presumably
in the Department of Homeland Security,
Christy Gnome would have the authority
to, you know, track or not track abuses
to some degree, right?
>> I mean, [clears throat] yeah, I think
that's a little bit of a neilistic view.
I mean, there's statutory requirements
on this. So I think there's a
fundamental question if you know I I
understand the perspective. I don't
agree with it that hey we can't trust
these institutions at all. It's like
there are rules, they follow the rules,
they're also humans, they're infallible,
but I don't think people are like
willy-nilly deciding whether they want
to do this or not.
>> No, I don't think so either. I'm just
trying to frame what I think are the
most commonplace criticisms and
critiques and worries about how this
technology is used in the context of you
know the second Trump administration.
You know, I I think from the point of
view of someone someone who is a skeptic
of Palunteer might say, well, in the
end, you are you are putting a lot of
power into the hands of people that you
know this person who thinks Donald Trump
is a threat to the republic, right,
doesn't trust, right? So there is there
there is there is just a way in which
you independent of what you think about
Trump himself when Palanteer goes to
work for a government US government any
other government you are putting
yourself in the position of trusting
that government with this very
impressive technology that you've built
right
>> yeah I I I think that's right that's you
have to pick your customers
>> right so can I just ask then about that
about that process because I think it's
sort of interesting like How how do you
calibrate that kind of decision making?
Like so just recently um the UK, United
Kingdom rolled out a plan to have a new
digital ID and I believe the head of
Palunteer in the UK said we don't think
there's enough privacy safeguards here
and we're not going to we're not going
to cooperate with the government on
this. So that's like a an exact example
of making this kind of sort of practical
but also moral decision-m.
What kind of thinking goes into a
decision like that?
>> Well, I'm probably not the best person
to comment as the CTO, but I think I'd
have to go back to the quote. I think
what um Louis Mosley said was that this
is an issue for the ballot box.
>> Louis Mosley is the head of Palunteer in
the UK.
>> That's right.
>> Right.
>> So um look, there's a lot of discursive
interaction both internally uh at
Palunteer. There's an obvious threshold
question of is this a legal use? Is this
a government that you trust and work
with? Right? Uh and then beyond that,
it's it's really a question of like are
the authorities there? What's the
potential for misuse?
>> Um are the protections there in our
software against those potential abuses?
U and is the work actually going to lead
to something meaningful?
>> See, that's really interesting though,
right? That that he said it's a matter
for the ballot box. And again, I know
you're not you're not running that
decision, but it's still as an outsider
to the work your company does.
It seems like he or the larger corporate
enterprise made a judgment that
basically a political judgment that the
digital ID issue had not been adequately
litigated by British democracy for you
to cooperate with it. Isn't that's kind
of a fascinating It's a fascinating
decision. I I mean I
>> you talked to Louis about that. I would
I would give you the other side of that
which is I think a lot of the policies a
lot a lot of things that people are
struggling with right now I think in the
US were voted on at the ballot box. You
know what ICE is doing right was voted
on at the ballot box. Um, so,
>> so, right. No, so you, so Palanteer,
[snorts] again, not that you speak for
everyone of Palanteer, but Palanteer is
more comfortable with mass deportations
in the context of a world where Donald
Trump campaigned on mass deportations
and won than it might be in a world
where he had not mentioned deportations
at all and then asked Palunteer to
design a mass deportation embedding
software.
>> What I'm saying is like the people voted
on this, right? you know, that seems
like a functioning democracy there. And
of course, there's going to continue to
be discursive interaction and
disagreement. That's our that's the
beauty of our political process, but
it's an important distinction.
>> Yeah. How do how do you think about that
with foreign clients? Like obviously,
Palunteer does work for the state of
Israel that is again obviously a source
of controversy, but so you're making a
judgment that Israel is an appropriate
partner. Yes.
>> Do you do work with dictator with
non-democratic governments?
>> We we do work with the US and our
allies. really the the nature of the
work depends particularly I think in the
coalitions that are fighting uh
terrorism the coalitions that are
pushing back on um the great power
competition that we're in
>> with the big four
>> but so would you be un if the kingdom of
Saudi Arabia called you up and said we
just want to build a digital ID system
you would be less likely to do that work
because they're not a democratic
government would that be fair
>> I would I would leave that up to to Alex
to figure out. It depends on their uses.
I'm not I'm not sure that's exactly
fair. I mean um is it leading to a more
efficient electronic government? You
know, what's the what's the purpose of
it is the question. There's a difference
of which agencies doing it and what is
their mandate?
>> What data do they have? How are they
trying to um what are the workflows
they're trying to enable?
>> But from the beginning, right, just
again in the name from Lord of the
Rings, right, you have this idea that
you are sort of you're building a
technology that in the story the name
originates from is used for good and for
evil. I'm just interested in the extent
to which that kind of judgment is more
than most companies woven into the kind
of governmental work that you're willing
to do. I mean, we we we we pick our
partners very carefully. Uh we want to
work on work that's important to the
west and um that includes the commercial
work we do in re-industrializing the
country.
>> So, let's let's use that as a way to
pivot to your own biography for a
minute. Um back in June, you were one of
four tech executives to be commissioned
as a lieutenant colonel in the Army
Reserves. Why did you do this?
for a lot of reasons. The the the
primary one is um
is is personal like what example am I
setting for my children? What what did I
learn from my father? So you have to go
back to how I came to America. You know
my family fled
uh violence in Nigeria when I was a
child. Our dog was decapitated. They
pistol whipped my father. They
threatened my mother. And I was I was a
young child, so I don't really have
direct memories of this, but obviously
it was very traumatic for my parents.
And we left all of our earthly
possessions behind and and restarted
life in Orlando.
And dad was, you know, he was this
person who was wildly successful in his
20s and never really successful again
after that. You know, after he came to
the US, it wasn't the classic immigrant
story. It was a guy who tried to start
something, went bankrupt. Like life was
always kicking him in the teeth.
>> But he was always so grateful to be
here. you know, life, liberty, and
possibility. He would remind us of the
counterfactual, like, but for the grace
of this nation, you'd be dead in a ditch
in Lagos. Uh, and so we always grew up
with that deep understanding of this.
You know, I don't know how useful I
really could have been to the military
when I was 23, but I think at 43, you
know, 20 years of of building Palunteer,
really learning all the mistakes I made
compounding into actual lessons, I think
I can be much more useful. and the
opportunity to serve. You know, there
there were times where my dad really
wished I would go to a service academy.
But I think what really catalyzed me to
push on this is my observation in Israel
after October 7th. Israel is an
incredibly technical country, bountiful
resources of technologists. Um the IDF
is incredibly skilled.
When on October 8th, they mobilized
300,000 reserveists. By definition, all
of them were prior service, you know,
conscription based country. When the
reser, you know, and what was their day
job? Well, they were mostly
technologists now with 20 years of
experience roughly. When they came back
in, they were horrified at the state of
technology, which is actually an
implicit self-critique. It's a version
of what I just said, like, well, yeah,
at 20 at 20, I knew how to code, but I
didn't know what I was doing, and wow, I
would just build these things
differently. I would architect them
differently. The IDF got more
modernization done in the four months
after October 7th than in the 10 years
that I'd worked with them prior. And
well, as as bountiful as technologists
are in Israel, we have the world's best
technologists in America. We have
uniquely talented people just like that
that today are outside of defending the
nation. We have made voluntary civil
military fusion impossible when our
adversaries make it a requirement. And
so it it's great to have some venue to
have America's greatest technologists
actually have some opportunity to give
back and contribute. And so the first,
you know, the four of us are the first
sort of uh salvo at that, but I think
there's an opportunity to really scale
that.
>> So what are you actually doing during
that time?
>> Each of us have different jobs that
align with our skills here. My focus is
really on on the workforce, workforce
development. You know, um I have a
personal interest and theory in
identifying the heretics that are in the
department. And you know, there's so
many talented green suitors. How do we
find them and make sure that they're in
a role that's big enough for their
actual skills? You know, rank often gets
in the way of of really getting the
right person in the right role. Um, and
so that's one piece of it. The other
piece of it is just actually helping
them with how they plan. So if you say,
look, the army of 2030 needs to look
like this and I need this many people
for all these sorts of skills. We have
these emerging roles. How do we actually
then what's the software infrastructure
that allows us to decompose that into
how many people do I need to recruit
now? How am I doing against that goal?
What's my pipeline for training and
developing them? That's closer to my job
jar.
>> Who are the other three who were
commissioned with you?
>> We have the CTO of Meta, Andrew Bosworth
Bos, um Bob Mcgru, who uh was the former
chief research officer at OpenAI and
before that he was at Palanter for 10
years. Um and Kevin Wheel who's the
chief product officer of OpenAI.
>> Okay. But would you say all of you in
different ways are involved in
bureaucratic modernization or like Yeah,
that's fair. Do you think there's any
potential tension between your work,
your obligations, basically your
responsibilities at Palanteer and your
responsibilities to the US military?
Well, I I think hopefully everything
I've learned commercially working with
thousands of commercial customers can be
repurposed to actually more efficiently
deliver solutions here. The re there's a
reason I'm focused on work that doesn't
overlap with anything else that Paler
does. So there's no appearance of
conflict. But you know the army has lots
of reserveists and those reserveists
have day jobs and the army has a whole
process for managing conflicts and
assigning what it is that you can work
on based on what is your day job.
>> Okay. So there's someone above you
effectively in the military chain of
command who's deciding if you're
crossing lines. Um, do you see any
tension between your own personal
narrative and family history as an
immigrant to the US and the fact that
Palunteer is working to effectuate mass
deportations? I guess more more
generally, what is your view of
immigration policy based on that
biography?
>> Well, my my own view is that
assimilation is important like we came
here legally. we adopted
uh you know we believe in America um
that immigration has made this country
strong but legal immigration there are
rules to follow and it's even true if
you just zoom out it's like how will you
maintain the society where um
broad parts of the American people feel
gaslit by the process it is actually the
the lack of enforcement breeds nealism
[clears throat] and uh that's not
tenable
>> right I Yeah, I I agree with that. There
is also though I think clearly an a
conflict or a tension in right of center
politics right now between people who
take your view and basically say
immigration is good for America but the
system we've had is a disaster and we
need to restore order and people who say
we just have too many immigrants period
and you know South Asian immigrants in
particular like I don't know do you see
yourself as effectively trying to make
immigration policy more credible
for the purpose of allowing continued
immigration.
>> Well, I'll let that be decided by at the
ballot box. I think um what I view is
the latter thing that you pointed out is
a reaction to having no enforcement of
the former, you know. So, it's easy to
to go and say that, but when
when when you feel like you're losing
jobs, when you feel like the societyy's
being torn apart, when you feel like no
one's being responsive, this is what
happens. And um
this is why I really believe in getting
getting the organizations to be
legitimate and function and work.
Otherwise, what is the basis for making
policy? It's it's really tenuous right
now,
>> right? So that seems like an attempt to
sort of have a kind of civic nationalist
vision from the perspective of corporate
America. And I think
>> I'm just speaking from my individual
perspective here,
>> right? I know you're not offering
Palunteers's perspective on immigration
policy, right? But you are a,
>> you know, you're you're a corporate, I
won't say a corporate titan, but you
are, you know, you are a leader of
corporate America. And so it's notable
to have this kind of civic nationalism
expressed in part because this was not,
I think, the dominant mindset in Silicon
Valley in the 1990s and 2000s, right?
For for an extended period of time, I
think the tech industry was very much
defined by not a hostility to America,
but a kind of postnist where citizens of
the world were serving global culture.
Certainly not just true of Silicon
Valley. I think it was true of a lot of
elite American institutions in ways that
contributed to the populist rebellion in
the end. And the idea of tech executives
serving in the military, I think, is a
very sort of very concrete shift away
from that that older perspective. Um,
and I I don't think it's just Palanteer
where you see that shift, right? Um,
there's sort of hundreds of tech and AI
startups that are focused on military
technology.
>> When we got direct commission, the four
of us, between the four of us, maybe a
thousand people in the valley reached
out saying, "One, this is amazing. into
how can I get involved?
>> But what do you think is driving this
change in attitude overall? Cuz it seems
notable like I lived through September
11th. There was some kind of shift after
September 11th, but it seemed to
dissolve pretty quickly. What do you
think is happening that makes this kind
of mentality more common in Silicon
Valley?
>> I don't want to be reductionist about
it, but I I think you you can't discount
the effect of the invasion of Ukraine.
It was a moment where people kind of
realized all these things they took for
granted actually just don't happen on
their own and that actually someone can
just decide to roll a bunch of tanks
across a border and try to change a
fundamental reality in the world and you
can actually dissuade that without hard
power. Uh that perhaps there is still
evil in the world and that evil is not
us. you could characterize a lot of the
malaise of the last 20 years as kind of
feeling like oh we screwed up in Iraq or
Afghanistan and you know maybe were the
problem and this this element of
self-loathing that I think Putin's
invasion brought a lot of clarity to uh
and and a recognition that these things
have to be done well. That's really
interesting because again, as with
immigration, it seems like there are two
very different reactions to the invasion
that are present in American politics on
the center right in the Trump
administration. And one sees it as kind
of a continuation of the Iraq
Afghanistan story where it's like, look,
here again is another foreign war that
Americans, you know, are unwisely inshed
in. And in fact, it's yet another case
study in how we need to effectively
retrench and rebuild, but but retrench,
right? But you're offering what is in
the end, I think, a much more hawkish
view, right, of the lessons that the US
should take from
>> Well, I'm offering a view of what I
think is galvanized Silicon Valley,
>> right?
>> Um, and certainly, I think different
pockets of America have different
reactions to this. Um I think I think
though there's you know a broader
narrative that unfortunately unfolds
over many decades that people have kind
of lost the plot on
and you you could kind of ask like
arguably for the last 10 years we've
lost deterrence uh as a nation you know
you look at the the Crimea in 2014 the
militarization of the Spratley Islands
by the Chinese in 2015 the breakout
capability of Iran on the bomb and then
a pogram happening in Israel two years
ago.
you know, so peace is not there right
now. Um, that doesn't mean I'm saying we
need to go out and have wars all over
the place, but peace comes from
deterrence and we've lost deterrence.
Now there's there's a national question
of what should we do about that. Um, my
argument from a builder's perspective is
that a big part of why we've lost
deterrence is the excesses of having won
the cold war or I think more accurately
it should be framed as the Soviets lost
the cold war and being the sole
superpower for some period of time. Uh,
if you really look at what made the
industrial base work in World War II uh,
in the early war, it wasn't a defense
industrial base. It was an American
industrial base. We have kind of
whitewashed history to forget that
Chrysler built minivans and missiles.
Ford built satellites until 1990.
General Mills the serial company used to
build torpedoes. You know that American
innovative spirit. Now the the
conventional wisdom of this story is
that uh we lost competition in the
industrial base. This consolidation just
led to less players and they became less
good at providing it. Maybe a little fat
and happy. I don't think that's right. I
think what actually happened is that you
drove out uh the crazies and the sort of
wild engineering spirit moved out to
other parts of our economy parts of our
economy that became disconnected from
serving the nation you know and um
that's what's changed in this present
moment whether it's the invasion of
Ukraine you could say SpaceX Palunteer
and led it before then interested group
of founders technologists who want to
build in the national interest and who
have heterodox ideas you need the
heretics. The heretics end up being your
heroes. Even even the formation of the
air force was an act of heresy. You had
Billy Mitchell um who at the time was
part of the army and he really pissed
off the navy by showing that you could
drop a bomb from an airplane instead of
you know using a boat to do it. He was
court marshaled. He died in disgrace.
Posthumously they created the air force.
So he didn't even get to see his heresy
become heroism. uh but he's the founder
of the air force you know and I I think
um more than ever in this time we need
our heretics.
>> So is that is that the fundamental
tension in a way between the new players
in the sort of Silicon Valley part of
the defense industry and the old guard
that you are offering yourselves as
potential outside builders for things
that the existing services prefer to
build themselves. like what are what are
the is that a tension point? What are
the tension points?
>> Five years ago that was really a tension
point. You know, famously Palantra had
to sue the army not once but twice to
get the right to compete. Uh and
>> and the army wants to build its so this
isn't just about ships. The army wants
to create its own proprietary software.
>> Humans want to create their own things.
So it's it's not like hey the army's bad
or the service is bad is this is a
function of human nature. Our greatest
competition in the commercial world is
the same thing. It is that institution's
desire to build their own solution
rather than having this foreign object
come by that like not invented tear
syndrome people call it right and and
what what is the clarifying way of
thinking about this well existential
threat so yeah having won the cold war
facing no threats you're going to go
down a long path of indulging in this
sort of um the the large s of building
exactly what you want and how you want
to do it there's no back pressure um
there there's no there's no threat
that's going to align you to to
developing the right thing at the right
speed. You know, what's going to empower
the heretics there and I think the world
has changed in a way. So that's why I
say in the present five years ago that
was a problem. Now it's very different
the the amount of heterodox thinking
that's being absorbed. You know the way
I often frame it is the department of
defense is a monopsiny department of war
is a monoponyy like people are very
familiar with monopoly where you have
one seller of a thing but a monopony is
when you have one buyer of a thing and a
lot of the dysfunction is that's the
root cause that you have a single buyer.
You can think about the great monopsiny
of the 1990s, Walmart, and it, you know,
what was their tagline? Everyday low
prices. You know, you can remember the
ads where they would roll back the
prices. So, their strategy was
effectively, we have the distribution,
we need to squeeze our suppliers and
control price. They didn't see Amazon
coming. This is the problem for the
monopsin. You don't have enough
competition to realize what's what's
actually happening in the marketplace.
>> And competition in this area just takes
the form of military conflict, right?
or at the very least the strong threat
of military conflict. So
>> talk about from the point of view of the
heretics but as much as you can specific
to Palanteer
what are the changes that would prevent
the US from losing the next war?
>> Well I think that AI and software is a
wonderful asymmetric advantage of the
US. I mean there are no Indian or
Chinese enterprise software companies
that are on the world stage. You know it
is a unique strength that we tend to
underestimate here. AI is an American
phenomenon. Deepseek would not exist if
they had not stolen the model from from
Open AI through distillation. Yes, they
had clever optimizations, but the
fundamentals of it is this is a
phenomenon that's happening, you know,
in a small radius around the San
Francisco Bay area. It's an American
phenomenon. You're not going to win the
war with software and AI. It can it can
increase your lethality. At the end of
the day, you you're going to have to be
able to build things. You know, you're
going to need mass that you can bring to
a fight that drives deterrence. And I
think the the analogy I would give you
is World War II. The Germans were far
better engineers than the Americans.
They had really exquisite technology.
They just couldn't build it at any sort
of scale. They could build one-off
little things here or there. What did we
have? We had just incredible
manufacturing capability. It even
brought awe to Stalin. He couldn't
believe what we were capable of doing.
Um our things were less sophisticated,
but but you know, quantity is a quality
of its own. Uh, and I think if you look
at the present moment, you might say
that sounds awful lot like our
adversary. And so we need a high low
mix. And and I think part of this is we
have to be able to build these things
here again [clears throat] with speed.
And that's what the new entrance are
really bringing. I don't think most
people recognize that Gulf War I was a
watershed moment for the Chinese. They
could not believe how quickly the
Americans rolled over the fourth largest
army in the world. And since that
happened, they have been systematically
investing in countering the key
capabilities that enable us to do that,
whether it's in space, whether it's our
Navy. And so now they've had 30 years of
thinking about this, developing things
that continue to push us back and make
our life harder. While we haven't really
been treating them like a peer
adversary, so I I think we're not
behind, but we could be behind if we
continue to believe that we have no
competition.
>> But it's more than that, right? You're
not just trying to build mid-level
military technology at scale. You're
also trying to create new military
technology that integrates AI
especially. Right. What what is Titan?
>> Titan is our um it's a project that we
have with the US Army partnered. We're
the prime on it, but we're partnered
with Anderrol and L3 and north of
Grumman. It's a it's a satellite ground
station on wheels is how to think of
it's a truck. There there are multiple
form factors. There's a truck version of
it, but the whole point is to be able to
connect soldiers on the ground to
national level intelligence that allows
you to do deep sensing that enables long
range precision fires.
>> What is deep sensing?
>> Uh how can I sense deep into the battle
space? So the deep sensing is like not
just what can I see from my truck, but
how can I use all the sensors that we
have to tell the truck what can you see?
So that is an example of a new form of
military technology that did not exist
before that is being designed using the
kind of software that
>> I think it becomes feasible. Yeah. I
mean many of the concepts have been
around for a while but what is the unit
cost of producing it? How long will it
take? How many people you need to do it
to actually run the software that's in
the truck? Right.
>> Being able to collapse all of that down
to something that's survivable that's
mobile. Um you know what would you have
done before the truck? You can ask that
question. Well, there's a question, why
is it even a truck to begin with?
Because you need to be mobile. Because
if if if you are static, you know, if
you have a big command center, you're
going to get blown up. That's not
survivable. US service members will die.
Now, if you can do that same thing that
would have taken 400 people in a huge
logistical footprint with four people
while moving, hopefully they're going to
survive.
>> And how much can you do without people
in a world where part of the future of
warfare is drone technology? I'm I'm
structurally skeptical there. That's
that's that's where the fantasy goes.
Fantasy terror, you know, fear. Yep.
Fear and fantasy both. Go on, tell me
your skepticism.
>> Um that actually there's a fair amount
of human judgment required for any of
these things. You know, it's not a
simple game constrained by rules. Uh and
that the better way to think about this
is we what the soldiers need, what our
uniform service members need is an Iron
Man suit. something that gives them much
more efficiency, much more effectiveness
at doing the job that they're already
trained to do, but is too hard to get
done right now or if we did it the old
way would not be survivable in a future
conflict and therefore provides no
deterrence. You know, everything is not
about getting into the next fight. It's
actually building technologies that
dissuade the next fight.
>> But why do you need the person inside
the Iron Man suit if you could just
build the Iron Man robot that has the
same capacities?
>> I'm not sure you can. First of all, I'm
I'm I'm leaving aside just military
doctrine that [clears throat] there's
always going to be a human on the loop.
That's just how military makes.
>> Well, that's that's a related question,
right? Since we've been talking about
the kill chain, so much of the kill
chain assumes that you have to have a
human being in the loop when you decide
to fire a missile or kill someone,
right? That's the moral side of this.
But but you're arguing that just
practically you can't imagine a world
where that element
>> I just I don't think it would work the
way that people think it would work in
the in the you know Terminator nightmare
scenario. Um I'll give you one example.
It's like uh
>> I also think there's there's an element
of this where it's more of a difference
of of degree than kind. So we tend to
think about it as like okay we have
these autonomous weapons that are going
to be built. Well, if we go back to the
70s, we have fighter jets with radar
that see beyond the horizon,
[clears throat] see things that the
human cannot see, that tell you, hey,
there's an enemy aircraft here. Okay, so
you're already relying on the computer.
There's some belief in the computer
seeing that. Um, then assuming you want
to engage it, you press a button that
releases a missile where the terminal
guidance to the target is done by a
computer as well. So that kind of sounds
like an autonomous weapon. sounds like
we've had autonomous weapons since the
70s. There is a kind of sensationalism
around the present moment that makes it
sound like hey this is a difference of
kind and I think we're just saying I'm
saying it's a difference of degree
actually and that you know in the
context of having a human on the loop
we're just extending their capabilities
but there are lots of people maybe not
at Palanteer but in Silicon Valley who
think that you know they are building
machines that will be you know and in
some in some period of time better than
the pilot
at making the decision required of them
of you know when and how to pull the
trigger right and there's a level of
super intelligence that's possible
through AI we are racing the Chinese toa
to achieve some level and that level
like the atomic bomb gives you this kind
of super advantage in military conflict
and in the end that's much more of the
whole ball game than figuring out you
know the right the right way to improve
our kill chain loop Oops. Right now
you're skeptical. Tell me tell me why
>> tell me why you're so skeptical. Give me
more.
>> I think the secularists in Silicon
Valley are filling the god-shaped hole
in their heart with AGI that that
there's not an empirical basis to
believe that such a thing, you know,
it's like, okay, the models get better.
Why do you think that this cliff is
going to happen or they somehow turn us
into house cats? And you know, and and
you kind of see it. It's like the the
people who have religion are the most
skeptical of this. people who are kind
of transhumanists and it it becomes like
what they wish were true. Uh and then
they run around with the doomerism the
dumerism of of Silicon Valley. It's both
a fundraising sticktick where the
frontier labs can say my technology is
so powerful it's going to lead to mass
unemployment so you better invest in me
or you're going to be poor. Um and also
it's divorced from any sort of reality.
They are sitting in Silicon Valley
building these models spending no time
on the front lines of how are people
using this? That's exactly my job. You
know, being with the ICU nurse at at in
at Tampa or being with the submarine um
industrial parts manufacturer in uh New
Hampshire. Well, when you see it
intersect the front line, it's actually
empowering the worker to do more. You
know, that the nurse spends less time
collating clinical notes, more time by
the bedside of the patient. The
submarine parts manufacturer spends less
time looking and analyzing change orders
and replanning the work, and more time
building the parts that actually move
the enterprise forward. So there's a
much more subtle uh reality that I think
is positive and empowering. I think that
the ultimate litmus test is when you ask
these frontline workers not only, hey,
how do you feel about your job now that
you're using AI? It's obviously positive
as you might expect from my my
description here. Much more profoundly
when you ask them, how do you feel about
your children's future in America given
AI? They're wildly positive. And so how
do you square that sort of um optimism
for the future with the doomerism coming
out of the valley? Well, I'll you know
how I swear it which is they're they're
living in a bubble and it happens to be
very good for them from a fundraising
perspective. But I think it has huge
>> be good for you if they are if it does
actually push AI further and make you
know like
>> I want the models to get more powerful
that's great I think you know but the
analogy I'd give you it's like
electricity just producing electricity
is not valuable you know you would just
add you know you have to actually be
able to consume it so the valuable part
were the people who built the machine
tools that ran on electricity that
powered the industrial age of course
producing electricity is a precondition
to that but we're so skewed to one side
of this equation, the supply side. We're
not thinking about the demand side in a
way that's productive. This is where I
do worry about China because I don't
think they have the same AGI fantasies
we do. They they're kind of explicit
strategy is to be the best at
implementing AI for economic value.
That's what we should be doing.
>> So, I'm incredibly sympathetic to that
narrative. But then I have children. I
am religious. I'm not a technologist.
So, there's limits to my own
understanding of AI, right? So I always
worry that I'm overly tempted to
underindex on the you know the the
strong AGI scenarios and I guess I worry
a little bit that you might be tempted
for a slightly different reason right
which is that as I keep sort of pressing
on Palunteer is in this position of
having this incredibly powerful
technology that you have to keep making
moral and political judgments about who
do you sell it to? Who do you work with?
Who do you trust with this technology?
Right? Um, and it's in your interest in
a way to convince yourself that the
moral stakes of your work is always
going to be somewhat constrained. You're
not worried that you or anyone else is
in the position of building Skynet,
building the system that yields true
>> disaster. We're explicitly not building
Skynet. The the thing I'd say is I'd
offer a little bit of evidence which is
for the for the frontier labs to be
successful they've all started to have
to build software around their models.
You know you can think about chat GPT as
the software interface to a model. Um
you can think of all the coding
assistants as software interfaces to the
model. And I think in the general public
there's a lack of clarity of what is the
software and what is the AI. Uh, and the
more and more advanced uses of this
stuff really require better models,
sure, but they require more software. So
I, you know, yes, maybe you could say no
conflict, no interest. The fil view of
this would be like, well, you're
incentivized to believe it, but I spend
every day building things
>> that inform this position.
>> Yeah. No, no. I'm I'm more likely to
trust your sense of things than my own.
That's why I'm interviewing you. And
that brings me to my last question for
you, which is that in addition to being
an officer in the US military and the
CTO of Palunteer,
you're now a wouldbe Hollywood
executive, right? That's right. We I've
started a film production company
to make content that makes you proud to
be an American, not Pravda,
entertainment, but a lot of this was
built on my own assimilation journey. So
when I came to the US in the early 80s,
I would sit on the couch with dad and
watch Rambo 3 and Rocky 4 and Hunt for
Red October and um also
>> War Games and Terminator 2. Just just
throwing those out there, right? Those
two
>> Star Trek, I'll offer you some
optimistic sci-fi, but al also things
that reflect comedy like Beverly Hills
Cop, you know, that there there's a
sense of heroism. It's not just about
war movies. It's it's it's about like
what is the American spirit? And I like
to say as a 5-year-old, I knew what it
felt like to be an American before I
knew civics or our political philosophy
or our history. And I think that feeling
is really important. Explains why people
went back to the theater to see Top Gun
Maverick over and over again. Obviously,
they already knew the plot the second
time around, but the feeling is is
really important. Um, and a lot of our
content right now is kind of filled with
a little bit of self-loathing, maybe a
lot of nealism, a sense that, you know,
America is a force for bad in the world.
Sometimes it's subtle, sometimes it's
not so subtle. We've been here before as
a country in Vietnam. Essentially, we
had a lot of movies that felt this this
character arc of self-loathing. And it's
actually the reason that George Lucas
made American Graffiti in 73, which he
was kind of tired of it. just wanted to
make a movie about boys chasing girls
driving cars. Uh, and I think it it was
like kind of the pallet cleanser that
set the tone for the big pumpup movies
of the late '7s and ' 80s that we've
just been talking about here. And I
think they're really powerful stories to
be told. Um, there there's a great
opportunity to tell a story on the 25th
anniversary of 9/11 that has nothing to
do with terrorism or planes flying to
the building per se, to focus on a very
what I view as a quintessentially
American story. the nine everyday New
Yorkers who went to work that day and
courage was courageous. They motivated
each other to get 12,000 souls out of
that building in the 102 minutes between
the first strike and the towers
collapsing. All of our narratives of
this tend to focus on the 2,000 or so
folks we lost, which you know is a grave
tragedy. But even our worst moment,
that's the best of us. You know, what is
it that we want to communicate to our
children that being American means? Um,
you know, I think that's really
important. All right, on that patriotic
note, Sham Sankar, thanks so much for
joining me. [music]
>> Thanks for having me, Ross.